This article challenges the view of Fordism as a development local to the American Midwest. The dynamics that have been analyzed under the heading of Fordism were neither local to the Midwest, nor limited to the productive and reproductive characteristics in the US and Europe. Rather they were, from the very start, global dynamics. This is especially clear in the connection between the automotive industry and the rubber industry in the Global South. The phenomena commonly identified with Fordism such as high pay and an impetus to working class consumption cannot be separated from the extreme exploitation in the rubber producing regions of the world that made them possible. At the heart of Fordism is the creation and maintenance of a stratified labor force, manipulated by differentiated but interlocking relations of social reproduction. The reproductive regimes in the US and the tropics should not be analyzed as separate phenomena, but as two constituent elements of the Fordist dynamic of production. Drawing on literature from three continents, this paper argues for the relevance of a global perspective in the study of the early automotive industry.

Cover Letter:
To the editors,

I am writing to submit for publication my article entitled "Fordism, Social Reproduction and the Global Division of Labor." This article constitutes the beginning of my attempt to adequately theorize a global history of the rise of Fordism. Most of the historical literature on the early automotive industry in the US treats it as a regionally bounded object, divorced from a global context. By examining one of the most important inputs into automotive production, rubber, this article insists on the relevance of Global South labor history to the rise of Fordism and vice versa.

I have chosen to submit this article to "Labor" for several reasons. First of all, I appreciate the journal's commitment to rigorous research and academic freedom. Secondly, I appreciate the global and interdisciplinary scope of the journal. Together, these have enriched the study of working class history. As a global study that draws on both historical and social theoretical literature, my article contributes to both of these values.

I would like to thank the editors for their consideration of my article, and I hope that it finds a home here with "Labor."

Kenyon Cavender
PhD Candidate, Sociology
Binghamton University
